# Chapter 1-6

A propos: I have often wondered what became of those nymphets
later? In this wrought-iron world of criss-cross cause and
effect, could it be that the hidden throb I stole from them
did not affect their future? I had possessed her—and she
never knew it. All right. But would it not tell sometime
later? Had I not somehow tampered with her fate by involving
her image in my voluptas? Oh, it was, and remains, a source
of great and terrible wonder.
I learned, however, what they looked like, those lovely,
maddening, thin-armed nymphets, when they grew up. I remember
walking along an animated street on a gray spring afternoon
somewhere near the Madeleine. A short slim girl passed me at
a rapid, high-heeled, tripping step, we glanced back at the
same moment, she stopped and I accosted her. She came hardly
up to my chest hair and had the kind of dimpled round little
face French girls so often have, and I liked her long lashes
and tight-fitting tailored dress sheathing in pearl-gray her
young body which still retained—and that was the nymphic
echo, the chill of delight, the leap in my loins—a childish
something mingling with the professional frétillement of her
small agile rump. I asked her price, and she promptly replied
with melodious silvery precision (a bird, a very bird!)
“Cent”. I tried to haggle but she saw the awful lone
longing in my lowered eyes, directed so far down at her round
forehead and rudimentary hat (a band, a posy); and with one
beat of her lashes: “Tant pis,” she said, and made as if to
move away. Perhaps only three years earlier I might have seen
her coming home from school! That evocation settled the
matter. She led me up the usual steep stairs, with the usual
bell clearing the way for the monsieur who might not care to
meet another monsieur, on the mournful climb to the abject
room, all bed and bidet. As usual, she asked at once for her
petit cadeau, and as usual I asked her name (Monique) and her
age (eighteen). I was pretty well acquainted with the banal
way of streetwalkers. They all answer “dix-huit”—a trim
twitter, a note of finality and wistful deceit which they
emit up to ten times per day, the poor little creatures. But
in Monique’s case there could be no doubt she was, if
anything, adding one or two years to her age. This I deduced
from many details of her compact, neat, curiously immature
body. Having shed her clothes with fascinating rapidity, she
stood for a moment partly wrapped in the dingy gauze of the
window curtain listening with infantile pleasure, as pat as
pat could be, to an organ-grinder in the dust-brimming
courtyard below. When I examined her small hands and drew her
attention to their grubby fingernails, she said with a naïve
frown “Oui, ce n’est pas bien,” and went to the washbasin,
but I said it did not matter, did not matter at all. With her
brown bobbed hair, luminous gray eyes and pale skin, she
looked perfectly charming. Her hips were no bigger than those
of a squatting lad; in fact, I do not hesitate to say (and
indeed this is the reason why I linger gratefully in that
gauze-gray room of memory with little Monique) that among the
eighty or so grues I had had operate upon me, she was the
only one that gave me a pang of genuine pleasure. “Il était
malin, celui qui a inventé ce truc-là,” she commented
amiably, and got back into her clothes with the same highstyle
speed.
I asked for another, more elaborate, assignment later the
same evening, and she said she would meet me at the corner
cafè at nine, and swore she had never posé un lapin in all
her young life. We returned to the same room, and I could not
help saying how very pretty she was to which she answered
demurely: “Tu es bien gentil de dire ça” and then, noticing
what I noticed too in the mirror reflecting our small Eden—
the dreadful grimace of clenched-teeth tenderness that
distorted my mouth—dutiful little Monique (oh, she had been
a nymphet all right!) wanted to know if she should remove the
layer of red from her lips avant qu’on se couche in case I
planned to kiss her. Of course, I planned it. I let myself go
with her more completely than I had with any young lady
before, and my last vision that night of long-lashed Monique
is touched up with a gaiety that I find seldom associated
with any event in my humiliating, sordid, taciturn love life.
She looked tremendously pleased with the bonus of fifty I
gave her as she trotted out into the April night drizzle with
Humbert Humbert lumbering in her narrow wake. Stopping before
a window display she said with great gusto: “Je vais
m’acheter des bas!” and never may I forget the way her
Parisian childish lips exploded on “bas,” pronouncing it
with an appetite that all but changed the “a” into a brief
buoyant bursting “o” as in “bot.”
I had a date with her next day at 2.15 P.M. in my own
rooms, but it was less successful, she seemed to have grown
less juvenile, more of a woman overnight. A cold I caught
from her led me to cancel a fourth assignment, nor was I
sorry to break an emotional series that threatened to burden
me with heart-rending fantasies and peter out in dull
disappointment. So let her remain, sleek, slender Monique, as
she was for a minute or two: a delinquent nymphet shining
through the matter-of-fact young whore.
My brief acquaintance with her started a train of thought
that may seem pretty obvious to the reader who knows the
ropes. An advertisement in a lewd magazine landed me, one
brave day, in the office of a Mlle Edith who began by
offering me to choose a kindred soul from a collection of
rather formal photographs in a rather soiled album
(“Regardez-moi cette belle brune!”). When I pushed the
album away and somehow managed to blurt out my criminal
craving, she looked as if about to show me the door; however,
after asking me what price I was prepared to disburse, she
condescended to put me in touch with a person qui pourrait
arranger la chose. Next day, an asthmatic woman, coarsely
painted, garrulous, garlicky, with an almost farcical
Provençal accent and a black mustache above a purple lip,
took me to what was apparently her own domicile, and there,
after explosively kissing the bunched tips of her fat fingers
to signify the delectable rosebud quality of her merchandise,
she theatrically drew aside a curtain to reveal what I judged
was that part of the room where a large and unfastidious
family usually slept. It was now empty save for a monstrously
plump, sallow, repulsively plain girl of at least fifteen
with red-ribboned thick black braids who sat on a chair
perfunctorily nursing a bald doll. When I shook my head and
tried to shuffle out of the trap, the woman, talking fast,
began removing the dingy woolen jersey from the young
giantess’ torso; then, seeing my determination to leave, she
demanded son argent. A door at the end of the room was
opened, and two men who had been dining in the kitchen joined
in the squabble. They were misshapen, bare-necked, very
swarthy and one of them wore dark glasses. A small boy and a
begrimed, bowlegged toddler lurked behind them. With the
insolent logic of a nightmare, the enraged procuress,
indicating the man in glasses, said he had served in the
police, lui, so that I had better do as I was told. I went up
to Marie—for that was her stellar name—who by then had
quietly transferred her heavy haunches to a stool at the
kitchen table and resumed her interrupted soup while the
toddler picked up the doll. With a surge of pity dramatizing
my idiotic gesture, I thrust a banknote into her indifferent
hand. She surrendered my gift to the ex-detective, whereupon
I was suffered to leave.