# Chapter 1-9

Divorce proceedings delayed my voyage, and the gloom of yet
another World War had settled upon the globe when, after a
winter of ennui and pneumonia in Portugal, I at last reached
the States. In New York I eagerly accepted the soft job fate
offered me: it consisted mainly of thinking up and editing
perfume ads. I welcomed its desultory character and
pseudoliterary aspects, attending to it whenever I had
nothing better to do. On the other hand, I was urged by a
war-time university in New York to complete my comparative
history of French literature for English-speaking students.
The first volume took me a couple of years during which I put
in seldom less than fifteen hours of work daily. As I look
back on those days, I see them divided tidily into ample
light and narrow shade: the light pertaining to the solace of
research in palatial libraries, the shade to my excruciating
desires and insomnias of which enough has been said. Knowing
me by now, the reader can easily imagine how dusty and hot I
got, trying to catch a glimpse of nymphets (alas, always
remote) playing in Central Park, and how repulsed I was by
the glitter of deodorized career girls that a gay dog in one
of the offices kept unloading upon me. Let us skip all that.
A dreadful breakdown sent me to a sanatorium for more than a
year; I went back to my work—only to be hospitalized again.
Robust outdoor life seemed to promise me some relief. One
of my favorite doctors, a charming cynical chap with a little
brown beard, had a brother, and this brother was about to
lead an expedition into arctic Canada. I was attached to it
as a “recorder of psychic reactions.” With two young
botanists and an old carpenter I shared now and then (never
very successfully) the favors of one of our nutritionists, a
Dr. Anita Johnson—who was soon flown back, I am glad to say.
I had little notion of what object the expedition was
pursuing. Judging by the number of meteorologists upon it, we
may have been tracking to its lair (somewhere on Prince of
Wales’ Island, I understand) the wandering and wobbly north
magnetic pole. One group, jointly with the Canadians,
established a weather station on Pierre Point in Melville
Sound. Another group, equally misguided, collected plankton.
A third studied tuberculosis in the tundra. Bert, a film
photographer—an insecure fellow with whom at one time I was
made to partake in a good deal of menial work (he, too, had
some psychic troubles)—maintained that the big men on our
team, the real leaders we never saw, were mainly engaged in
checking the influence of climatic amelioration on the coats
of the arctic fox.
We lived in prefabricated timber cabins amid a Pre-Cambrian
world of granite. We had heaps of supplies—the Reader’s
Digest, an ice cream mixer, chemical toilets, paper caps for
Christmas. My health improved wonderfully in spite or because
of all the fantastic blankness and boredom. Surrounded by
such dejected vegetation as willow scrub and lichens;
permeated, and, I suppose, cleansed by a whistling gale;
seated on a boulder under a completely translucent sky
(through which, however, nothing of importance showed), I
felt curiously aloof from my own self. No temptations
maddened me. The plump, glossy little Eskimo girls with their
fish smell, hideous raven hair and guinea pig faces, evoked
even less desire in me than Dr. Johnson had. Nymphets do not
occur in polar regions.
I left my betters the task of analyzing glacial drifts,
drumlins, and gremlins, and kremlins, and for a time tried to
jot down what I fondly thought were “reactions” (I noticed,
for instance, that dreams under the midnight sun tended to be
highly colored, and this my friend the photographer
confirmed). I was also supposed to quiz my various companions
on a number of important matters, such as nostalgia, fear of
unknown animals, food-fantasies, nocturnal emissions,
hobbies, choice of radio programs, changes in outlook and so
forth. Everybody got so fed up with this that I soon dropped
the project completely, and only toward the end of my twenty
months of cold labor (as one of the botanists jocosely put
it) concocted a perfectly spurious and very racy report that
the reader will find published in the Annals of Adult
Psychophysics for 1945 or 1945, as well as in the issue of
Arctic Explorations devoted to that particular expedition;
which, in conclusion, was not really concerned with Victoria
Island copper or anything like that, as I learned later from
my genial doctor; for the nature of its real purpose was what
is termed “hush-hush,” and so let me add merely that
whatever it was, that purpose was admirably achieved.
The reader will regret to learn that soon after my return
to civilization I had another bout with insanity (if to
melancholia and a sense of insufferable oppression that cruel
term must be applied). I owe my complete restoration to a
discovery I made while being treated at that particular very
expensive sanatorium. I discovered there was an endless
source of robust enjoyment in trifling with psychiatrists:
cunningly leading them on; never letting them see that you
know all the tricks of the trade; inventing for them
elaborate dreams, pure classics in style (which make them,
the dream-extortionists, dream and wake up shrieking);
teasing them with fake “primal scenes”; and never allowing
them the slightest glimpse of one’s real sexual predicament.
By bribing a nurse I won access to some files and discovered,
with glee, cards calling me “potentially homosexual” and
“totally impotent.” The sport was so excellent, its results
—in my case—so ruddy that I stayed on for a whole month
after I was quite well (sleeping admirably and eating like a
schoolgirl). And then I added another week just for the
pleasure of taking on a powerful newcomer, a displaced (and,
surely, deranged) celebrity, known for his knack of making
patients believe they had witnessed their own conception.