# Chapter 1-5

​    The days of my youth, as I look back on them, seem to fly away from me in a flurry of pale repetitive scraps like those morning snow storms of used tissue paper that a train passenger sees whirling in the wake of the observation car. In my sanitary relations with women I was practical, ironical and brisk. While a college student, in London and Paris, paid ladies sufficed me. My studies were meticulous and intense, although not particularly fruitful. At first, I planned to take a degree in psychiatry as many manqué talents do; but I was even more manqué than that; a peculiar exhaustion, I am so oppressed, doctor, set in; and I switched to English literature, where so many frustrated poets end as pipesmoking teachers in tweeds. Paris suited me. I discussed Soviet movies with expatriates. I sat with uranists in the Deux Magots. I published tortuous essays in obscure journals. I composed pastiches:

​    … Fräulein von Kulp
​    may turn, her hand up on the door;
​    I will not follow her. Nor Fresca. Nor
​    that Gull.

​    A paper of mine entitled “The Proustian theme in a letter from Keats to Benjamin Bailey” was chuckled over by the six or seven scholars who read it. I launched upon an “Histoire abrégée de la poésie anglaise” for a prominent publishing firm, and then started to compile that manual of French literature for English-speaking students (with comparisons drawn from English writers) which was to occupy me throughout the forties—and the last volume of which was almost ready for press by the time of my arrest.

​    I found a job—teaching English to a group of adults in Auteuil. Then a school for boys employed me for a couple of winters. Now and then I took advantage of the acquaintances I had formed among social workers and psychotherapists to visit in their company various institutions, such as orphanages and reform schools, where pale pubescent girls with matted eyelashes could be stared at in perfect impunity remindful of that granted one in dreams.

​    Now I wish to introduce the following idea. Between the age limits of nine and fourteen there occur maidens who, to certain bewitched travelers, twice or many times older than they, reveal their true nature which is not human, but nymphic (that is, demoniac); and these chosen creatures I propose to designate as “nymphets.”

​    It will be marked that I substitute time terms for spatial ones. In fact, I would have the reader see “nine” and “fourteen” as the boundaries—the mirrory beaches and rosy rocks—of an enchanted island haunted by those nymphets of mine and surrounded by a vast, misty sea. Between those age limits, are all girl-children nymphets? Of course not. Otherwise, we who are in the know, we lone voyagers, we nympholepts, would have long gone insane. Neither are good looks any criterion; and vulgarity, or at least what a given community terms so, does not necessarily impair certain mysterious characteristics, the fey grace, the elusive, shifty, soul-shattering, insidious charm that separates the nymphet from such coevals of hers as are incomparably more dependent on the spatial world of synchronous phenomena than on that intangible island of entranced time where Lolita plays with her likes. Within the same age limits the number of true nymphets is strikingly inferior to that of provisionally plain, or just nice, or “cute,” or even “sweet” and “attractive,” ordinary, plumpish, formless, cold-skinned, essentially human little girls, with tummies and pigtails, who may or may not turn into adults of great beauty (look at the ugly dumplings in black stockings and white hats that are metamorphosed into stunning stars of the screen). A normal man given a group photograph of school girls or Girl Scouts and asked to point out the comeliest one will not necessarily choose the nymphet among them. You have to be an artist and a madman, a creature of infinite melancholy, with a bubble of hot poison in your loins and a super-voluptuous flame permanently aglow in your subtle spine (oh, how you have to cringe and hide!), in order to discern at once, by ineffable signs—the slightly feline outline of a cheekbone, the slenderness of a downy limb, and other indices which despair and shame and tears of tenderness forbid me to tabulate—the little deadly demon among the wholesome children; she stands unrecognized by them and unconscious herself of her fantastic power.

​    Furthermore, since the idea of time plays such a magic part in the matter, the student should not be surprised to learn that there must be a gap of several years, never less than ten I should say, generally thirty or forty, and as many as ninety in a few known cases, between maiden and man to enable the latter to come under a nymphet’s spell. It is a question of focal adjustment, of a certain distance that the inner eye thrills to surmount, and a certain contrast that the mind perceives with a gasp of perverse delight. When I was a child and she was a child, my little Annabel was no nymphet to me; I was her equal, a faunlet in my own right, on that same enchanted island of time; but today, in September 1952, after twenty-nine years have elapsed, I think I can distinguish in her the initial fateful elf in my life. We loved each other with a premature love, marked by a fierceness that so often destroys adult lives. I was a strong lad and survived; but the poison was in the wound, and the wound remained ever open, and soon I found myself maturing amid a civilization which allows a man of twenty-five to court a girl of sixteen but not a girl of twelve.

​    No wonder, then, that my adult life during the European
period of my existence proved monstrously twofold. Overtly, I
had so-called normal relationships with a number of
terrestrial women having pumpkins or pears for breasts; inly,
I was consumed by a hell furnace of localized lust for every
passing nymphet whom as a law-abiding poltroon I never dared
approach. The human females I was allowed to wield were but
palliative agents. I am ready to believe that the sensations
I derived from natural fornication were much the same as
those known to normal big males consorting with their normal
big mates in that routine rhythm which shakes the world. The
trouble was that those gentlemen had not, and I had, caught
glimpses of an incomparably more poignant bliss. The dimmest
of my pollutive dreams was a thousand times more dazzling
than all the adultery the most virile writer of genius or the
most talented impotent might imagine. My world was split. I
was aware of not one but two sexes, neither of which was
mine; both would be termed female by the anatomist. But to
me, through the prism of my senses, “they were as different
as mist and mast.” All this I rationalize now. In my
twenties and early thirties, I did not understand my throes
quite so clearly. While my body knew what it craved for, my
mind rejected my body’s every plea. One moment I was ashamed
and frightened, another recklessly optimistic. Taboos
strangulated me. Psychoanalysts wooed me with
pseudoliberations of pseudolibidoes. The fact that to me the
only objects of amorous tremor were sisters of Annabel’s,
her handmaids and girl-pages, appeared to me at times as a
forerunner of insanity. At other times I would tell myself
that it was all a question of attitude, that there was really
nothing wrong in being moved to distraction by girl-children.
Let me remind my reader that in England, with the passage of
the Children and Young Person Act in 1933, the term “girlchild”
is defined as “a girl who is over eight but under
fourteen years” (after that, from fourteen to seventeen, the
statutory definition is “young person”). In Massachusetts,
U.S., on the other hand, a “wayward child” is, technically,
one “between seven and seventeen years of age” (who,
moreover, habitually associates with vicious or immoral
persons). Hugh Broughton, a writer of controversy in the
reign of James the First, has proved that Rahab was a harlot
at ten years of age. This is all very interesting, and I
daresay you see me already frothing at the mouth in a fit;
but no, I am not; I am just winking happy thoughts into a
little tiddle cup. Here are some more pictures. Here is
Virgil who could the nymphet sing in single tone, but
probably preferred a lad’s perineum. Here are two of King
Akhnaten’s and Queen Nefertiti’s pre-nubile Nile daughters
(that royal couple had a litter of six), wearing nothing but
many necklaces of bright beads, relaxed on cushions, intact
after three thousand years, with their soft brown
puppybodies, cropped hair and long ebony eyes. Here are some
brides of ten compelled to seat themselves on the fascinum,
the virile ivory in the temples of classical scholarship.
Marriage and cohabitation before the age of puberty are still
not uncommon in certain East Indian provinces. Lepcha old men
of eighty copulate with girls of eight, and nobody minds.
After all, Dante fell madly in love with his Beatrice when
she was nine, a sparkling girleen, painted and lovely, and
bejeweled, in a crimson frock, and this was in 1274, in
Florence, at a private feast in the merry month of May. And
when Petrarch fell madly in love with his Laureen, she was a
fair-haired nymphet of twelve running in the wind, in the
pollen and dust, a flower in flight, in the beautiful plain
as descried from the hills of Vaucluse.

​    But let us be prim and civilized. Humbert Humbert tried
hard to be good. Really and truly, he did. He had the utmost
respect for ordinary children, with their purity and
vulnerability, and under no circumstances would he have
interfered with the innocence of a child, if there was the
least risk of a row. But how his heart beat when, among the
innocent throng, he espied a demon child, “enfant charmante
et fourbe” dim eyes, bright lips, ten years in jail if you
only show her you are looking at her. So life went. Humbert
was perfectly capable of intercourse with Eve, but it was
Lilith he longed for. The bud-stage of breast development
appears early (10.7 years) in the sequence of somatic changes
accompanying pubescence. And the next maturational item
available is the first appearance of pigmented pubic hair
(11.2 years). My little cup brims with tiddles.

​    A shipwreck. An atoll. Alone with a drowned passenger’s
shivering child. Darling, this is only a game! How marvelous
were my fancied adventures as I sat on a hard park bench
pretending to be immersed in a trembling book. Around the
quiet scholar, nymphets played freely, as if he were a
familiar statue or part of an old tree’s shadow and sheen.
Once a perfect little beauty in a tartan frock, with a
clatter put her heavily armed foot near me upon the bench to
dip her slim bare arms into me and tighten the strap of her
roller skate, and I dissolved in the sun, with my book for
fig leaf, as her auburn ringlets fell all over her skinned
knee, and the shadow of leaves I shared pulsated and melted
on her radiant limb next to my chameleonic cheek. Another
time a red-haired school girl hung over me in the métro, and
a revelation of axillary russet I obtained remained in my
blood for weeks. I could list a great number of these onesided
diminutive romances. Some of them ended in a rich
flavor of hell. It happened for instance that from my balcony
I would notice a lighted window across the street and what
looked like a nymphet in the act of undressing before a cooperative
mirror. Thus isolated, thus removed, the vision
acquired an especially keen charm that made me race with all
speed toward my lone gratification. But abruptly, fiendishly,
the tender pattern of nudity I had adored would be
transformed into the disgusting lamp-lit bare arm of a man in
his underclothes reading his paper by the open window in the
hot, damp, hopeless summer night.

​    Rope-skipping, hopscotch. That old woman in black who sat
down next to me on my bench, on my rack of joy (a nymphet was
groping under me for a lost marble), and asked if I had
stomachache, the insolent hag. Ah, leave me alone in my
pubescent park, in my mossy garden. Let them play around me
forever. Never grow up.